---
title: "Internationalization"
section: customization
---

This guide covers how Colibri uses Rails' internationalization features, and how
you can leverage and extend these features in your Colibri contributions and
extensions.

## How Colibri i18n works

Colibri uses the standard Rails approach to internationalization so we suggest
take some time to review the [official Rails i18n
guide](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/i18n.html) and the
[rails-i18n.org wiki](http://rails-i18n.org/wiki) to help you get started.

### The colibri_i18n project

Colibri now stores all of the translation information in a separate GitHub project
known as [colibri_i18n](https://github.com/colibri/colibri_i18n). This is a stand
alone project with a large number of volunteer committers who maintain the
locale files. This is basically the same approach followed by the Rails project
which keeps their localizations in
[rails-i18n](https://github.com/svenfuchs/rails-i18n).

The project is actually a Colibri extension. This extension contains translations and
uses the [globalize3 gem](https://github.com/svenfuchs/globalize3) to provide
translations for model records.

!!!
You will need to install the [colibri_i18n](https://github.com/colibri/colibri_i18n)
gem if you want to use any of the community supplied translations of Colibri.
!!!

### Translation Files

Each language is stored in a YAML file located in `config/locales`. Each YAML
file contains one top level key which is the language code for the translations
contained within that file.  The following is a snippet showing the basic layout
of a locale file:

```yaml
pt-BR:
  colibri:
    say_no: "Não"
    say_yes: "Sim"
```

***
All translations for Colibri are "namespaced" within the `colibri` key so that they
don't conflict with translations from other parts of the parent application.
***

#### Localization Files

Colibri maintains its localization information in a YAML file using a naming
convention similar to that of the Rails project.  Each of the localization
filenames contains a prefix representing the language code of the locale. For
example, the Russian translation is contained in `config/locales/ru.yml`.

***
Colibri has over 43 locale files and counting.  See the [GitHub
Repository](https://github.com/colibri/colibri_i18n/tree/master/config/locales) for a
complete list.
***

#### Required Files

Each locale that you wish to support will require both a Rails and Colibri
translation.  The required Colibri translation files are available automatically
when you install the `colibri_i18n` gem.

You don't need to copy any files from `colibri_i18n` or `rails-i18n` for their
translations to be available within your application. They are made available
automatically, because both `colibri_i18n` and `rails-i18n` are railties.

### Translating Views

When reviewing the source of any view in Colibri you'll notice that all text is
rendered by passing a string to a helper method similar to:

```erb
<%%= Colibri.t(:price) %>
```

The *Colibri.t()* helper method looks up the currently configured locale and retrieves
the translated value from the relevant locale YAML file. Assuming a default
locale, this translation would be fetched from the en translations collated from
the application, `colibri_i18n` and `rails-i18n`. Its relative key within those
translation files would need to be this:

```yaml
en:
  colibri:
    price: Price
```

### The Default Locale

Since Colibri is basically a Rails application it has the same default locale as
any Rails application.  The default locale is `en` which use the English
language.  We can verify this in the rails console

```ruby
>> I18n.locale
=> :en
```

You can also see in the console how the default locale values are translated
into English

```ruby
>> Colibri.t(:action)
=> Action
```

## Deploying the Translations

The `colibri_i18n` gem is configured in the same manner as any Rubygem in a Rails
application.  Simply add it to the `Gemfile.` using the git url.

```ruby
gem 'colibri_i18n', :github => 'colibri/colibri_i18n'
```

### Setting the Default Locale

The default locale for Rails, and therefore Colibri, is `en`. This can be changed by setting
`config.i18n.default_locale` in `config/application.rb`. This setting is ignored
unless the relevant translation file are within `#{Rails.root}/config/locales`
or the `colibri_i18n` gem.

### Setting the Default Currency

***
This functionality was new in Colibri 1.2. Please refer to the appropriate
guide if you are using an older version.
***

In earlier versions of Colibri, we used `number_to_currency` to display prices for
products. This caused a problem when somebody selected a different I18n locale,
as the prices would be displayed in their currency: 20 Japanese Yen, rather than
20 American Dollars, for instance.

To fix this problem, we're now parsing the prices through the Money gem which
will display prices consistently across all I18n locales. To now change the
currency for your site, go to Admin, then Configuration, then General Settings.
Changing the currency will only change the currency symbol across all prices of
your store.

There are three configuration options for currency:

* `Colibri::Config[:currency]`: 3-letter currency code representing the current currency.
* `Colibri::Config[:currency_symbol_position]`: Whether to include the symbol before or after the monetary amount.
* `Colibri::Config[:display_currency]`: Whether or not to display the currency with prices.

## Creating and Modifying Locales

While we have used [LocaleApp](http://localeapp.com) in the past to manage the translations for the colibri_i18n project, Localeapp does not have support for different branches within the same project. As such, please submit Pull Requests or issues directly to https://github.com/colibri/colibri_i18n for missing translations.

## Localizing Extensions

Colibri extensions can contain their own `config/locales` directory where
developers can include YAML files for each language they wish to support.

We strongly urge all extension developers to ensure all customer facing text is
rendered via the `Colibri.t()` helper method even if they only include a single default
language locale file (as other users can simply include the required YAML file
and translations in their site extension).

***
Since Colibri extensions are equivalent to Rails Engines they can provide
localization information automatically (just like a standalone Rails
application.)
***
