---
title: Colibri 0.30.0
section: version
---

# Summary

Colibri 0.30.0 is the first official release to support Rails 3.x. It has
been several months in the making but we're finally here. Unfortunately
we haven't had the time to write up detailed release notes and the
documentation is still a work in progress. We'll try to mention the
highlights here and we'll continue to update the documentation in the
coming weeks.

***
We're always looking for more help with the Colibri documentation.
If you'd like to offer assistance please contact us on the colibri-user
mailing list and we can give you commit access to the
[colibri-guides](https://github.com/colibri/colibri-guides) documentation
project.
***

# Rails Engines

Colibri is now heavily reliant upon the concept of Rails Engines. This
represents a significant architectural shift from previous versions of
Colibri. This will likely be the most time consuming upgrade of Colibri
you'll ever have to make. The change is the result of a major change in
Rails itself so the difficulties are unavoidable. The good news is that
Rails has adopted many of the ideas used in Colibri (Engines are now
equivalent to Colibri Extensions and visa versa.) This means that there is
very little non-standard Rails behavior left in Colibri.

## No More Site Extension

Previous versions of Colibri required a [site
extension](http://usoft.com.ua/colibri/legacy/0-30-x/extensions.html#thesiteextension)
in order to customize the look and feel of the site. One major
improvement in Colibri is that this is no longer necessary. All of the
content that normally goes in your site extension can now be moved to to
*Rails.root*.

## Extensions are Now Gems

Extensions are now installed as Rubygems. They are also no longer
deployed to *vendor/extensions*. You need to add the required extensions
to you *Gemfile*. There is a comprehensive [Extension Guide](/developer/extensions_tutorial) in the
online documentation which can assist you.

As of the time of this release there are only a limited number of
extensions that are currently compatible with Colibri 0.30.x. It is
suggested that you check the [Extension
Registry](http://usoft.com.ua/colibri/extensions) for more information on
which extensions are 0.30.x compatible. Check back often because the
Colibri core team will be working on updating the more critical ones
immediately after the release.

***
Its relatively easy to convert an existing extension into a gem.
Its suggested you find a 0.30.x compatible extension and study the
source code for a better idea on how to do this.
***

# Improvements to Payments

Payments have been significantly improved in this version of Colibri. One
of the most important changes is the addition of a [state
machine](https://github.com/pluginaweek/state_machine) for payments.
Payments that are submitted to a payment gateway for processing are in
the "processing state." This will help to prevent additional attempts to
process the payment through customer refreshing, etc. Failed payments
are also recorded and given a "failed" state.

We have abandoned the concept of payment transactions and now record
most of the information directly in the payment record. When in comes
time to calculate the payment total, only payments in the "completed"
state are counted.

# Simplification of Adjustments

Adjustments have also been dramatically simplified. Instead of having
the concept of *Charge* and *Credit* we just have the single
*Adjustment*. What used to be called a *Credit* is now just a negative
adjustment. Adjustments also now have a *mandatory* attribute. When this
attribute is *true* the adjustment is always shown when displaying the
order total, even if the value is zero. All non-mandatory adjustments
are removed from the order if their value is ever equal to zero.

***
Mandatory adjustments make it easy to show $0 for tax or shipping
when those cases apply. The thinking is we don't want customers to
wonder what the shipping cost because its not present - better to show a
$0 value explicitly.
***

# New Promotion Functionality

Promotion functionality in Colibri has been greatly improved. There is a
new *colibri_promo* gem which is included by default when you install
Colibri.

## Creating a Promotion

A new promotion requires a *name* and *code* attribute. The *code*
attribute can be used by customers when checking out to "activate" a
particular promotion.

***
This is standard "coupon code" functionality but you're not
required to have customers enter codes in order to utilize promotions.
***

## Promotion Rules

Once a new promotion is created you can create one or more rules for the
promotion. You can require that all rules for the promotion be satisfied
or just one of the rules.

Each of the rules is based on a Ruby class that extends *PromotionRule*.
There are four built in rule types for Colibri but others can be added via
extension or directly through your Colibri application code.

-   **Item Total:** Limit to orders with an item total above a specified
    amount
-   **Product:** Limit to orders containing one or all of the specified
    products
-   **User:** Limit to orders made by specific users
-   **First Order:** Limit to the first order by a user

# No More "Vendor Mode"

Colibri is deployed as a Rubygem now so the previous system of different
"boot modes" has been simplified. Colibri never needs to be deployed
inside of your application, even if you're using edge or a custom fork.
Thanks to Bundler you can reference any version of Colibri source directly
via *Gemfile* and either a physical directory location or a git
repository location.

***
See the [Source Guide](http://guides.usoft.com.ua/colibri/legacy/0-30-x/source_code.html) for a complete
understanding of all the changes to the organization of the source code.
***

# Upgrading

## Before You Upgrade

### Upgrade to the Previous Version

It is recommended that you upgrade to Colibri 0.11.x (the previous latest
stable version) first. The upgrade process should go much smoother if
you upgrade incrementally.

### Backup Your Database

It is always recommended that you backup your database before upgrading.
You should also test the upgrade process locally and/or on a staging
server before attempting on your live production system.

!!!
The Colibri 0.30.0 upgrade will delete any in progress orders
which should generally considered to be a safe thing to do since these
are typically just abandoned orders. There are also non trivial changes
to payments and other tables. Hang on to your database backup until
you're sure the upgrade has gone smoothly.
!!!

## Create a New Rails Application

It is suggested that you create a brand new Rails 3.x application and
then make the necessary changes to that application. We'll briefly walk
you through the steps to do this.

!!!
There have been major changes to how Rails applications (and
consequently Colibri) are configured and initialized. You will have an
easier time if you start with a new Rails application and migrate your
stuff over to it rather than trying to make changes to an existing Colibri
application so that its Rails 3 compliant.
!!!

### Copy Your Legacy Files

Colibri no longer requires that you have a "site" extension. This means
that you should copy all of the files in *vendor/extensions/site* into
the *app* directory of your new Rails application. This includes the
contents of the *public* directory.

### Add Colibri to the *Gemfile*

So now you have a new Rails 3.x application and you've moved over your
custom files. Its time to add the Colibri gem into the mix. Edit your
*Gemfile* and add the following entry:

<% ruby do %>
    gem 'colibri', '0.30.0'
<% end %>

Then install the Colibri gem using the familiar Bundler approach:

```bash
$ bundle install
```

## Upgrade Migrations and Assets

The gems that comprise Colibri contain various public assets (images,
stylesheets, etc.) as well as database migrations that are needed in
order to run Colibri. There is a Rake tasks designed to copy over the
necessary files.

```bash
$ bundle exec rake colibri:install
```

Once the migrations are copied over you can migrate using the familiar
Rake task for this.

```bash
$ bundle exec rake db:migrate
```
